## Cancer Incidence Prediction
Problem Description:

The origin of predicting cancer incidence rates at a county level can be seen in its necessity for an effective and responsive public health surveillance operation. This is crucial for determining where to allocate resources, such as screening programs or cancer treatment services. The progression of this problem can be seen through advancements in data collection, statistical methods, and machine learning models. Initially, simple age-adjustment techniques were used, but over time, more sophisticated models have incorporated environmental, socioeconomic, and behavioral factors that contribute to cancer rates [3]. For example, Zhang discusses how the physical environment may be involved, with exposures to specific factors such as cigarette smoking, alcohol use, physical exercise, dietary intake, water or air pollution, and radiation, all of which have been linked to affecting the rate of cancer incidence [2]. Furthermore, predictive models and geographic information systems are used to identify cancer trends more accurately at the county level, as seen with the American Cancer Society’s use of a segmented-line linear regression model [4]. In our dataset, we follow the standard practice of using an age-adjusted cancer incidence rate to account for the discrepancy between age groups [1]. Obtaining a more accurate prediction of cancer incidence by county could result in targeted public health campaigns, better resource allocation, and a reduction in cancer occurrence by directing more care towards at-risk populations. 

Previous Efforts to Address the Problem:

Clegg et al [9] discuss an approach to looking at cancer incidence through a lens of socioeconomic status. Their approach involved combining nationwide data gathered over thirty years from the National Cancer Institute and the US Census to examine how often cancer in general - and different types of cancer - were diagnosed for different age groups stratified by different measures of socio-economic status.. This study found that individuals from lower socio-economic groups are more likely to be diagnosed with cancer and are more likely to be diagnosed with a higher stage cancer. This study uses the individual-level to map cancer diagnosis and journey to individual socio-economic characteristics that may contribute to cancer. What this approach lacks is a wider view into other factors that may contribute to cancer incidence, such as environmental or dietary factors.

Another county level prediction method was investigated using a Joinpoint Regression [23]. While this model is promoted by the National Institute of Health the input variables do not seem to address the socioeconomic, environmental, and dietary predictors our team would like to pursue. The primary response are the age adjusted cancer and death rates but stops short of why these rates exist. Our approach aims to investigate and predict why the rates may exist.

Approach #1 (Toshan Doodnauth):

For this analysis, I will be utilizing an elastic net regression analysis to predict cancer incidence rates. In order to account for overfitting and the model’s generalization ability, I will be using cross validation to support the prediction analysis. In terms of data sources, I will be using data available from the United States Government Agencies. The USDA provides data regarding poverty, population, and education. The CDC and EPA provide statistics involved with cancer related health outcomes and air quality, respectively. Finally, the NIH provides prior cancer incidence rates after size and rate adjustment.

Moss et al. attempted to determine county level cancer-incidence for specific types of cancer by relating the incidence rate to ethnic compositions, cancer type (breast, cervical, colorectal), physician density, and median household income [7]. While this study does use county level data for analysis, it does not account for all other cancer types, cancer-related factors such as air quality, poverty statistics (further than median household income), education levels, and prior health outcomes by county [2]. My analysis will include these factors and therefore provide a more holistic view than Moss et al.
With respect to the challenges that may be faced in this analysis, accounting for the computational cost of elastic net regression will be difficult. If necessary, I possess credits towards Amazon Web Services that will allow me to utilize their high performance computing hardware. Proper selection of tuning parameters (alpha and lambda) for the elastic net regression will be imperative towards an accurate prediction from this project. I will attempt to solve this issue by using cross validation and selecting the smallest root mean square error of several models.

Initially, I considered using lasso regression as I plan to obtain many sources of information, and run feature selection to use the most important predictors. However, lasso regression provides issues with over-shrinking and interpretability in its feature selection [6]. The second approach was a combination of principal component analysis and ridge regression, however elastic net with cross-validation is supported to be better in this situation as it combines the ridge shrinkage features in conjunction with the lasso regression type thresholding, while gaining the benefit of generalization from cross-validation [5]. 

